blog: add pgvector 0.6.0 post (#20874)
supabase/supabase: apps/www/_blog/2024-01-30-pgvector-fast-builds.mdx

---
title: 'pgvector 0.6.0: 30x faster with parallel index builds'
description: 'pgvector 0.6.0 brings a significant improvement: parallel index builds for HNSW. Building an HNSW index is now up to 30x faster for unlogged tables.'
author: egor_romanov
image: getting-started/rails/rails.jpg
thumb: getting-started/rails/rails.jpg
categories:
  - engineering
tags:
  - AI
  - performance
  - postgres
date: '2024-01-30'
toc_depth: 3
---

> pgvector 0.6.0 was released today, with a significant improvement: parallel index builds for HNSW. Building an HNSW index is now up to 30x faster for unlogged tables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pgvector 0.6.0 was released today, with a significant improvement: parallel builds for HNSW indexes. Building an HNSW index is now up to 30x faster for unlogged tables.
```

This release is a huge step forward for pgvector, making it easier to tune HNSW build parameters and increase search accuracy and performance.

## HNSW indexes in pgvector

We explored [how HNSW works](https://supabase.com/blog/increase-performance-pgvector-hnsw#how-does-hnsw-work) in an earlier post, so as a quick recap: HNSW is an algorithm for approximate nearest neighbor search. It uses proximity graphs and consists of two parts: hierarchical and navigatable small world. It operates over multiple layers with different densities or distances between nodes, where layers represent different connection lengths between nodes. Thus allowing HNSW to search, insert, and delete in linearithmic time.

## pgvector parallel index builds

Prior to 0.6.0, pgvector only supported building indexes using a single thread - a big bottleneck for large datasets. For example, building an index for 1 million vectors of 1536 dimensions would take around 1 hour and 27 minutes (with `'m'=16, 'ef_construction'=200`).

> With parallel index builds you can build an index on 1 million vectors of 1536 dimensions in 9.5 minutes (with `'m'=16, 'ef_construction'=200`) - 9 times faster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With parallel index builds you can build an index for the same dataset in 9.5 minutes - 9 times faster:
```

The trick is to use a large database while you build the index and then switch back to a cheaper instance after the index is built.

</Admonition>

### Embeddings with unlogged tables

Building time can be reduced _even further_ using unlogged tables.

An unlogged table in Postgres is a table whose modifications are not recorded in the write-ahead log (trading performance for data reliability). Unlogged tables are a great option for embeddings because the raw data is often stored separately and the embeddings can be recreated from the source data at any time.

One of the steps of index creation is the final scan and WAL writing. This is generally short but not parallelizable. Using unlogged tables allows you to skip the WAL, with an impressive impact:

| ef_construction | Build time: v0.5.1 | Build time: v0.6.0 (unlogged) | Improvement |
| --------------- | ------------------ | ----------------------------- | ----------- |
| 64              | 38m 08s            | 1m 38s                        | 23x         |
| 100             | 1h 06m 59s         | 2m 10s                        | 31x         |
| 200             | 1h 27m 45s         | 3m 37s                        | 24x         |

> pgvector 0.6.0 was [just released](https://github.com/pgvector/pgvector/releases/tag/v0.6.0) and will soon be available for Supabase projects! Again, a special shout out to Andrew Kane and everyone else who [worked on parallel index builds](https://github.com/pgvector/pgvector/issues/409).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Getting started

pgvector 0.6.0 was [just released](https://github.com/pgvector/pgvector/releases/tag/v0.6.0) and will be available on Supabase projects soon. Again, a special shout out to Andrew Kane and everyone else who [worked on parallel index builds](https://github.com/pgvector/pgvector/issues/409).
```
